>> So good afternoon everyone.
I'm Doug Davidson and I'm here to talk
to you about the Cocoa text system.
Now anyone who has ever worked with Cocoa has seen the
text system in action because it's responsible for most
of the text you see displayed in
the typical Cocoa application.
But what may not be quite so obvious is
that there's an enormous depth to it.
Many different levels at which
you can deal with the text system
and particularly which you could customize its behavior.
And that's the main thing that I
want to talk to you about today.
For those of you who are new to Cocoa text, along the way
I will also be discussing quite a bit about how it works.
And of course, we have a great many things that are
new in Leopard I will be discussing from time to time.
So what is it the Cocoa text system does?
The main job of the text system is to take a text document, that
is characters plus their attributes like color and font
and so forth and to convert them into glyphs which are the
individual displayable elements to the font and positions
so that they can be displayed on the screen.
So here's my standard example.
We have a character set, a with an acute accent and
attributes blue color, Helvetica 64 font, and centered.
And what the text system does is take the character and
attributes and convert it into the appropriate glyph
or glyphs in the font needed to
display this and the position centered,
so that we get a nice blue accented a. The text system
also deals with all the ways we have of getting text
into the system and modifying it, particularly
with all the interactions that the user may do
with keyboard and mouse and so forth to edit the text.
And furthermore, it handles import from and
export to a wide variety of text document formats.
So just to orient you, let me point out
where we are in the layering of the system.
Most of the Cocoa text system of course is in AppKit,
many of the fundamental classes are defined in foundation,
and those were the toll free bridge that their
counterparts at the core foundation level.
In addition there's another a framework that's well not new
for Leopard, but newly public for Leopard call Core Text
which is what the Cocoa text system
uses for its low level line layout.
Like many pieces of Cocoa, the text system uses model
view controller structure and I'm also going to use
that to structure some of the pieces of my talk.
At the top of the view level we have classes like NSTextView,
the bottom model layer, classes like NSTextStorage,
and in the middle are the control objects that mediate
between the two like NSLayoutManager and so on.
Now there are a lot of APIs here, it's natural to ask
when you're starting where do you want to go first?
So here's a brief guide.
If you're trying to draw some little piece of text
in your view, the natural first place to look is
at the API we call a string drawing APIs.
I'm going to discuss in a minute.
Or you can use NSCell which in turn uses the string
drawing APIs to draw when it needs to draw text.
If you want a small bit of editable
text, the natural thing to look
at would be NSTextField or any of the other controls.
If you have large pieces of text, these are editable
or not, the natural class to look at is NSTextView.
If you have needs for detailed measurement or
specialized drawing of text that beyond what you can get
from the string drawing APIs, the place to look
is NSLayoutManager at the controller level.
I'm going to be talking quite a bit about that later on.
Finally there is also Core Text.
Now if you're working in Cocoa, you probably
are not going to need to use Core Text directly.
It's primarily intended for Carbon developers as a modern
replacement for things like QuickDraw and ATSUI so forth.
As I said Cocoa, the Cocoa text system does use Core Text.
And essentially all the features of Core Text are available
for you plus a lot more through the Cocoa text system.
But it is there if you want to use it directly.
So let's start at the view level.
The view level, the main class in
the Cocoa text system is NSTextView.
That handles all of the display
and editing of all sorts of text.
In fact, even a control like NSTextField,
if it wants to edit text,
it uses NSTextField to do it called a field editor.
And NSTextView is very, very customizable,
even if your never subclass at all.
It has a large number of options,
it has many, many delegate methods
and it can be hooked up in a wide variety of configurations.
But rather than tell you about it,
let me just show you some of that.
Let's go over to demo one.
( Period of silence )
Take a look at this.
So if I just drag an NSTextView into my nib
and Interface Builder with zero lines of code,
immediately I get all, we want this machine?
( Period of silence )
There we go.
So, if I just drag a text view into my nib in Interface
Builder, immediately, with zero lines of code,
I have all the features of text edit
right at my fingertips in my application.
That's rich text, graphics, undo, spell checking,
any or all of these that I want for free.
And a few more for Leopard.
So for example, automatic detection of
URLs, that will be zero lines of code.
Tool tips for the URLs, for the links, zero lines of code.
How about smart quotes?
( Period of silence )
In Leopard, zero lines of code.
Say what about grammar checking?
( Period of silence )
In Leopard, zero lines of code.
But supposing for a minute that you
were actually going to write some code.
So if you're willing to write, oh say a dozen lines of code,
you can start working with multiple instances
of NSTextView and NSTextContainer.
And you can hook them up in a wide variety of ways.
So for example, if you got multiple pages
or what I have here is multiple columns.
Going a little further.
If you were actually willing to subclass NSTextContainer
override two method, maybe another dozen lines of code,
you can get all sorts of fancy shapes, arrangements of text.
And if you were actually willing to write a
custom NS view subclass, maybe 20 lines of code,
you can actually put text just about anywhere you want.
Oh and one thing I should mention is that the way I've
hooked these up, these are not many separate text documents.
These are many different views of the same text document.
So if I make changes in one, they'll be
automatically reflected instantly in all of them.
But really, this is the easy stuff.
We've talked about this sort of thing
many times at past WWDC sessions.
There's copious documentation on it.
And there are many examples, many code
examples available, including this one.
This should be available for download now.
The main thing I want to do in this session is to
go a little deeper and to explore some more subtle
and more thorough going modifications to the text system.
So let's go back to the slides.
( Period of silence )
Just for the record, here is a list
of some of the principle new feature
that we have available through NSTextView in Leopard.
But I want to strongly encourage you to take a look
at the AppKit release notes you
received, and take a look at the headers.
There are many, many new methods that we've
added, far more than I could list here right now.
All sorts of new individual methods, new
options, new delegate methods and so forth.
Many of them specific responses, specific requests from you.
So go take a look at the headers,
go take a look at the release notes.
You'll find a lot of nice surprises.
Alright, so now let's start going down a little deeper.
Let's go down to the model level.
At the model level, the main class of NSText
Core Text system is NSTextStorage.
That models text document as first
of all a string that is an NSString,
conceptually of UTF-16 characters plus attributes.
So conceptually to each character is
associated a dictionary of attributes.
And these attributes cover fonts, colors,
topography, paragraphs, anything and everything
that might affect the way the text is
supposed to be laid out and displayed.
Let me back up for a minute and talk a
bit about the inheritance hierarchy here.
So the basic class is NSAttributedString that is defined
in foundation, toll free bridged with CFAttributedString
in core foundation and I should mention that CFAttributedString
is the principle model class used by Core Text.
So now for the first time we have a unified
rich text model across both Carbon and Cocoa.
Then the immediate subclass of NSAttributedString is
NSMutableAttributedString, which adds mutability,
toll free bridged again with CFMutableAttributedString.
And then AppKit has a special subclass of
NSMutableAttributableString called NSTextStorage.
And I'll be getting into its features later.
So how is it you work with NSAttributedString?
If you want to get at the characters, then there's a string
method that gives you an efficient proxy, an NSString.
And you can use all the NSString methods on to get access
to the characters of the string, of the AttributedString.
If you want to look at the attributes, well typically it's
rare for an attribute to apply to just a single character.
Usually they're going to apply to some
range, short or long, of characters.
So when you ask for the attribute dictionary at a
particular index, we return you to that dictionary,
but we also return by reference a
range, we call the effective range.
That is some range over which those,
that set of attributes holds.
And we don't guarantee it's the longest range,
but it's some range over which they are effective.
If you just want a single attribute, again you can just
ask for the attribute at a given index, we return it,
we also return by reference, again effective range,
there's some range for which that attribute holds.
If you do want the longest range over which an attribute
or set of attributes is valid, then you can ask for it
with these longestEffectiveRange methods.
It can be a little expensive to compute
it especially if the range is very long.
So you shouldn't ask for it unless you actually
plan to be dealing with that whole range.
But it is there if you want it.
Now what are these attributes?
As I said, NSAttributedString is defined in foundation.
But AppKit adds a great deal to it.
And there is an AppKit/NSAttributedString.h header,
which is different from the foundation
NSAttributedString.h header.
And in the AppKit/NSAttributedString header are defined
the interesting attributes that the text system understands.
For each attribute, there is a string constant, that
is the name, the value, the key for that attribute,
like NSFontAttributeName, NSForegroundColorAttributeName,
NSParagraphStyleAttributeName.
And also is specified what the class is for that,
is intended for the values of that attribute.
And in addition there's also specified
a default value that is going to be used
if that attribute doesn't happen to be present.
So the default color is black, the default
font is Helvetica 12 and so on, so forth.
So one very common programming practice is when you're
working with an attributed string, you want to go over it
and deal with the different attributes in it
and you want to work by ranges of attribute.
So this is a common code pattern.
Here we start off with a range, range which
is the overall range we want to deal with.
And we're going to iterate through it by
effective ranges for a particular attribute.
In this case, I've chosen to use the
ParagraphStyleAttribute which is the one
that describes all paragraph level formatting.
Line spacing, indents, margins and so forth.
So we are going to ask for the
ParagraphStyleAttribute at a given index,
and here we're getting the longest effective range
because we do want to deal with the whole thing.
And that will be our effective range.
Now as a default value, NSParagraphStyle DefaultParagraphStyle
used if the attribute isn't present.
Here I'm not actually doing anything much with it.
I'm just logging the value.
And then after we've dealt with that effective
range, then we go and start over again
at the NSMaxRange of the effective range.
That is just beyond its end.
And get the next value of the attribute and so on by ranges.
So NSMutableAttributedString adds mutability.
How can we deal with that?
First of all there is a mutableString method that gives an
efficient proxy as an NSMutableString that you can use.
You can use all of the NSMutableString
methods to change the characters.
You can also change the characters directly acting
on the mutable attributable string with methods
like replaceCharactersInRange:withString
or withAttributedString.
And then there are some convenience methods that do
specifically insertion, append and delete and so forth.
If you just want to change attributes,
then you can call setAttribute,
Attributes:range that will just remove any attributes that
are a set these, this set of attributes for that range.
Or add attributes to add some dictionary of
attributes to the attributes that are already there.
Override any that might conflict.
Or you can just set a single attribute.
Add it or remove it.
So let's go back to our code example.
( Period of silence )
Can we have the slides?
Sorry. In this case, we're going to
take that same set of code and instead
of just logging the value we're going to actually modify it.
In this case I've chosen to take that paragraph
style and modify it by changing its alignment
to center it so to make all the text centered.
So we take the same code as before
plus we take that paragraph style
for that effective range and we make a mutable copy.
And we change it.
We call setAlignment, CenterAlignment.
And then we take that modified, the copy, and set
it back the attribute on the same effective range
that the original paragraph style applied to.
And then we release it.
Very common code pattern when dealing
with mutable attributed strings.
So as I said, attributed strings are defined in
foundation but a great is added to them in AppKit.
And one of the things that is added is in
the AppKit/NSStringDrawing.h header.
A set of methods that we call the
StringDrawing methods, generally.
And these include both drawing,
simple drawing and measuring of text.
So the basic methods, you just draw an
attributed string in a Rect with various options
or get it sized again with various options.
And again there are a number of convenience
methods that take fewer arguments.
Some that take just a string and an attribute
dictionary instead of an attributed string.
These are the first place you should look if
you're just trying to draw a piece of text
in your view or image or other graphics context.
One thing that I should note when you're using these is
that the Cocoa text system uses the attributes defined
on attributed strings and not in
general where they, where they overlap,
not the same things that might be
defined on the graphics context.
So even if the attributes are not present.
So you, for drawing text with the text system,
you're never going to be setting the fonts
or colors on the graphics context.
Instead you'll be setting them as
attributes on your attributed strings.
Another thing that the AppKit adds to
attributed strings is import from and export
to a lot of different text document formats.
This includes plain text, RTF, RTFD,
HTML, word documents and so on.
For Leopard we've added the Open
Document format used by Open Office.
And the Office Open XML text document
format used by Word 2007.
The basic methods for import take either a file URL
or an NSData, that would be the contents of the file.
And they take a number of options and documentwide
attributes and they may return an error.
The basic export methods will give you either the data
of the document or a file wrapper that you can then write
out to disk or do whatever you like with.
Now there are many, many options.
There are lots of global documentwide
attributes like metadata.
And these things are all defined again in the
AppKit/AssistDistributedString.h header.
I urge you to take a look at it.
They are all specified in enormous detail there.
Now when you go to import from a rich
text document, usually it is not necessary
to specify the format that you want to read.
The text system can automatically
detect all these different formats.
You can specify if you want.
That's usually just for special cases.
For example, if you wanted to read HTML in as source, as
plain text, source rather than as the attributed result.
It's a bit different when it comes
to encodings for plain text.
Fortunately in Leopard we have a new feature.
And that is that we have a way of
tagging plain text documents according
to their encoding using extended attributes.
And when NSString writes out a string with an
encoding, it will automatically apply this tagging.
And NSString and NSAttributedString
will use this if it is there when they read
in that plain text document much better
than having to guess the encoding.
If its not there, of course then you may be forced to
specify or if you don't specify we'll try to guess,
but it really helps if you can
know the encoding of document's in.
And just let me put in a plug.
If you are planning to use plain text
documents, please try wherever possible
to use a Unicode encoding like UTF-8, UTF-16.
We also have a command line tool called a textutil
that provides access to these import
and export features of the Cocoa text system.
And it has a man page, you can read it.
This is something you can use if you want to use
these features from a shell or from a script.
Now in principle, it's possible to have any
combination of characters and attributes.
But not all combinations of characters
and attributes make sense.
For example, if you have a surrogate pair, it doesn't
really make sense to have different attributes
on the low end or the high part of the surrogate pair.
In general, if you have a character cluster like
an a with an accent, it doesn't really make sense
to have different attributes on the a and the accent.
This is not something that the Cocoa text system
tries to enforce, but we reserve the right to look
at just the attributes on the first
character of the cluster.
There are some other constraints
that can sometimes be enforced.
So the paragraph style attribute that I mentioned
describes paragraph level formatting for the text
and it really only makes sense if it is
actually constant over the whole paragraph.
That is from one paragraph break to the next.
And so there is a process, we call paragraph style fixing and
a method, fix paragraph style attribute and so forth
that causes this to be enforced
by a setting, the paragraph style.
Again the font that, attribute on a
certain characters should be a font
that can actually represent those characters.
And we have a process again called font fixing and a method
that will cause the fonts to be substituted as necessary
if they cannot represent the characters
to which they are applied.
And the text system will substitute a
font that can represent those characters.
Also attachments are represented by characters that are
supposed to apply to Unicode replacement character FFFC
and there's attachment fixing which removed the
attachment attributes from any other character.
So for all of these, there is a single
method, fix attributes in range.
And one thing to note about it is that it
fixes attributes only by changing attributes.
It never changes the underlying characters.
Now I mentioned NSTextStorage as a sub
class of NSMutableAttributedString.
And it adds two things primarily
to NSMutableAttributedString.
The first thing is that in an ordinary
MutableAttributedString,
font attribute fixing happens only
when you explicitly ask for it.
With NSTextStorage, attribute
fixing happens automatically.
So whenever you look at the attributes,
you can be sure they've been fixed.
The second thing that it adds is that
whenever an NSTextStorage is changed,
it notifies classes in the controller level.
It has, maintains a list of NSLayoutManagers.
And tells them about its change so that they can keep
current any information they may have about the text.
Now it's common that when you're making changes to
the text, you may be making many changes at once.
And it would be inefficient to notify the layout
manager and have it do work for every little change.
So what we have is a way for you to
batch up all those changes at once
and just notify the layout managers at the end.
And the way you do that is to called beginEditing before you
sequence of changes and then endEditing when you're done.
So here's an example, the same code again.
If you're modifying a text storage instead
of an arbitrary MutableAttributedString,
you start of by calling beginEditing.
Then you make all the changes just as before
and when you're done you call endEditing.
Now if this text storage happens to be hooked up
to an NSTextView, NSTextView adds something.
It adds undo.
And if you want your change to be undoable, then you
also have to notify the text view of what you are doing.
And the way you do that is adding a few more lines of code.
First of all, before you want to make your changes, you call
out the text view and ask it should change text in range,
replacement string or range is replacement
strings, you should listen to the answer too.
Then you do your changes.
One other little thing.
The text view adds has, or possibly has its own notion
of a default paragraph style that it wants to be used
in preference to the system wide default paragraph style.
And then when you're done making your
changes, after you've called endEditing,
then you call the text view and tell it didChangeText.
And that's all you need to do to make it ready for undo.
Oh, one other little thing I did here was
to set an action name that can be used
on the undoManager for the title of the undo menu.
Of course, in production code, you would make
sure this string was a localized string, right?
Now this is starting to look like a lot of code.
This is Cocoa.
We don't like a lot of code.
So we have an easier alternative.
NSTextView implements a method changeAttributes.
And you can call this and you,
it has one argument, the sender.
Is some class that you define, and all the sender has
to do is implement a method called convertAttributes.
Takes a dictionary, returns a dictionary.
And what NSTextView will do is go through and for
each set of attributes that needs to be modified,
it'll pass in those attributes as a dictionary.
All you do is make your change to
those attributes and return it.
So for this particular change, centering, all
we would have to do is have a center object
which would implement convertAttributes to just make
this change, center the text for the paragraph style.
We wouldn't need to do all of that other stuff.
It would be done for us.
So let's talk about customization.
Why might I want to customize the text system at the model
level with a custom subclass in NSTextStorage?
Well, there are several possible reason.
One for example, I might want to
customize the attribute fixing process.
I could have a custom subclass of NSTextStorage
and override the attribute fixing
and have complete control over it.
Another possibility is that I might have a different
way of storing text other than as characters
and attribute dictionaries, but I still want to present
it to the Cocoa Text system with that sort of interface.
In that case I could use a custom text storage that
could provide the text system with what it needs.
But store it under an underlying in any form that I want.
One sub possibility of this is for example the one
that is used by Xcode for its code folding feature.
It has an underlying attributed string
that represents the entire unfolded text.
But then it has a custom subclass of NSTextStorage
that presents the folded text derived from that
to the text system for display and editing.
So now let's go over to the demo machine.
( Period of silence )
And let me show an example of this.
So the, the system of characters and attributes
that we have is fine for a lot of purposes.
But what if it doesn't meet your particular needs?
Well, you could just change it.
What I've got here is a custom NSTextStorage subclass.
It works just like an ordinary text storage.
For everything in it except for the text color.
And I've specified certain parts of this text
as headings and certain parts as sub headings
and certain parts as, the rest of it is body text.
And so I have this sort of rudimentary style
system here, just to show you you can do it.
And what this does is for all the heading text, it
doesn't apply any color that might be on the text.
It applies the heading color.
And for any text that's specified as sub heading, it
uses the color that's specified as a sub heading color.
And for all the remaining text, uses a
color that's specified as a body color.
Some nice bright colors.
Let's see what this looks like in code.
So I have a custom subclass of NSTextStorage.
And really there are three methods
here that I really need to override.
I use a mutable attributable string I call
contents to actually store the underlying text.
And then I've replaced characters in range with string.
These are the primitives.
And that just replaces the characters in
the underlying mutable attributed string.
And then it calls this method on NSTextStorage,
edited range, change in length and that is the method
that causes the layout measures
to be notified of the change.
Very simple, as is anything you do in any subclass.
And likewise with setAttributes, we set
the attributes on the underlying contents
and then we cause the layout managers to be notified.
The real meat of this is in our override of attributes
that index effective range that returns the attributes.
For every attribute except for the foreground color,
we are just going to return the
underlying attributes on our contents.
But I have defined a custom attribute
that I call headingType.
And that specifies whether the text
is heading or subheading or body.
And whenever I encounter that, then I
just synthesize a color based on that
as specified elsewhere and I use that as a foreground color.
And those are the attributes that are returned.
These synthesized set of attributes,
I return those to the text system.
And those are the attributes that get used.
So let's go back to the slides.
( Period of silence )
And now let's go to the controller level
and the main class in the Cocoa text system
at the controller level is NSLayoutManager.
And NSLayoutManager is the boss of the text system.
It manages all the processes that go on.
You remember that I said that the main job
of the text system was to convert characters
and attributes into glyphs and their positions.
So there are two main processes that are involved here.
One we call glyph generation where we get the glyphs.
And the second is layout where we position them into lines.
And NSLayoutManager calls on two
subsidiary classes. First, NSGlyphGenerator
to do the glyph generation and
NSTypeSetter to do the layout.
And then NSLayoutManager stores all the results.
And its NSLayoutManager that
actually does the drawing for the view.
So first glyph generation.
Now one thing to remember about NSLayoutManager
is that it's extremely lazy, just like you and me.
It does not calculate a result until it actually needs it.
So its not going to do glyph generation until
for example some client asks it a question
for which it needs to have the glyphs to answer it.
Also for Leopard we've added some
explicit methods that you can call
to explicitly request glyph generation for a specific range.
And when that happens, the layout
manager will call on the glyph generator,
saying give me the glyphs for this range of characters.
And then the glyph generator calls back
to the layout manage with the glyphs
that it has generated plus some attributes for them.
And a layout manager stores them.
Now if you want to use glyph generator
without layout manager, you could do it.
All you have to do is implement these
same methods that layout manager does
to receive the results from the glyph generator.
And there's a protocol for that, glyph storage protocol.
Layout, similarly.
Layout is done very lazily.
Layout manager is not going to do layout
until it actually needs the result.
Perhaps some client has asked a question for
which it needs layout to give the answer.
Or again we have some new explicit calls that you
can use to force layout for a particular range
of characters or range in the text, the screen.
And when it needs to do layout, the
layout manager calls on the typesetter.
Typesetter, get me some layout for this range.
And then the typesetter calls back to the
layout manager, as I'm going to discuss.
And the layout manager stores the results.
Now there's one very important that is new in Leopard.
And that's what we call non-contiguous layout.
In Tiger, layout was always contiguous.
That is we would never do a layout for one piece
of text without having layout for all the text
from the beginning of the document to that point.
In Leopard we've added a switch you can turn on.
And when the switch is turned on then the layout
manager will, is allowed to, doesn't have to
but will if it thinks it can do layout for one piece
of text without having, necessarily having layout
for any other piece of text before or after.
And the reason we implemented this is because it's
an enormous performance win for large documents.
With this change, with this turned on, text data can
easily open and deal with a million line text document.
And the reason its not on default is for capability reasons,
because it makes significant changes to the behavior
of many of the methods in NSLayoutManager.
Now if you are using NSLayoutManager
only indirectly, say through NSTextView,
then you could probably turn this
on without worrying much about it.
But if you are actually calling NSLayoutManager's
directly, then you will need before try turning this on,
you would need to review all your usage of layout manager
methods to make sure that, to see whether you need
to make any change to respond to this and if
you look at the layout manager header, there,
it's a bunch of descriptions there of
how non-contiguous layout changes behavior
of each different method on NSLayoutManager.
So during the layout process, one thing I
need to, should mention is that the glyphs
that the glyph generator produces aren't necessarily
only preliminary, not necessarily final.
And the reason is that in many fonts, many writing
systems, the actual glyphs that it used depend on context.
That is on the other glyphs to the
right and left of it in the line.
And the glyph generator doesn't
know what glyphs are in a line.
It's only the layout manager that puts glyphs in the line.
So its, the layout manager has to have, it's only
the typesetter that puts the glyphs in the lines.
So the typesetter has to have the ability to make
contextual changes to the glyphs during the layout process.
And it does so by calling again on the layout manager,
telling it to insert or remove or rearrange glyphs.
Now in general, it's important to remember the mapping
between characters and glyphs is not one to one.
It's potentially many to many.
A single character can be represented by many glyphs,
multiple characters can be represented by one glyph.
But we do make the restriction in the layout
manager that this mapping is always in order.
That is the glyphs are always stored in logical order,
in the same order as the characters
from which they are generated.
If they need to be reordered say
for example for bidirectional text,
then we do that by changing their locations and positions in
the line, not by changing their indexes in the glyph stream.
( Period of silence )
So after it may have made modification to
the glyphs, the typesetter positions them
by calling three methods in a particular order.
First it tells the layout manager which page, which
text container the glyphs have been placed in.
Then it tells them what line a particular set of glyphs has
been placed in and where that line is and what its size is.
And then for each glyph or each run of glyphs in that line,
it tells the layout manager where those glyphs are located.
And the layout manager stores all this information.
There are a few other things for special circumstances, some
glyphs are not shown, some may draw outside of their lines,
some may be attachments and the layout
manager is told of all these things as well.
So here's a brief example.
We have some English language text and some Arabic text.
At the top, the underlying characters are the bottom glyphs.
There are two things I want to point out.
First of all, even in ordinary ASCII English language
text, here we have a case where two characters, F and I,
are represented by a single glyph, and FI ligature glyph.
Now when we go over to our Arabic text, Arabic
is first of all it's written from right to left.
Second it's typically a cursive style,
handwriting style, writing system.
So most glyphs are going to be modified contextually
based on the other glyphs to the right and left of them.
And you can see that here.
First of all, the glyphs remain in order in logical order
in the glyph storage, but their positions are reversed,
go from right to left plus most of them have a different
form in, in context than they would in isolation.
Okay, there's another set of processes that are in
some sense the inverse of what we've just discussed.
And that's invalidation.
The layout manager stores lots of information so it
has to know when that information is no longer valid
so it can discard it and eventually
later recalculate it if necessary.
We have three kinds, display invalidation
will tell the view if there's a view
to that a certain region needs to be redisplayed.
Layout invalidation tells the layout manager that a
certain portion of layout isn't valid and can be discarded
Glyph invalidation says that the glyphs are no longer valid.
And should be discarded plus the layout
because that depends on the glyphs.
And if this information needs to be recalculated
later, again it'll be done so lazily only as needed.
So let me go through an example.
The user types a character in some
existing text in text view.
So the text view gets key down events and eventually
ends up inserting that character into the text storage.
Makes a change directly in the text storage.
Text storage as I said notifies the
layout manager whenever it's changed.
That's its job.
And then the layout manager discards any
information that it had about the layout
of the characters around that one that was just typed.
So eventually now that text view is
going to be, end up being redisplayed.
And when that happens, text view is going to say,
hey layout manager, what do I need to display?
And the layout manager will say, well I don't know that.
Ask the glyph generator.
Give me some glyphs.
And it will ask the typesetter, give me some layout.
And then it will go back to the text view and say, what
needs to be displayed, which glyphs need to be displayed?
And then finally the text view is going to call on
the layout manager to actually display those glyphs.
So the layout manager stores all sorts
of information about the layout of text.
Anything you might want to know, the
layout manager knows all if you ask it.
Any of the correspondences between characters and glyphs
and positions of glyphs and lines, back and forth.
The layout manager has methods to do all these things.
In fact anything that you need to do with
measurement of text or also with drawing of text,
it goes beyond what the simple string drawing methods can
give you, you probably want to go to NSLayoutManager
for that, because as I said the layout manager is
also what does the display of glyphs for the view.
It does it over in this text view.
It could do it for your view if you like.
There are two main entry points for this.
First of all, one for drawBackgroundForFlyphRange:atPoint
that does background colors.
It does table borders and backgrounds and so forth.
And then there's a second method, drawGlyphsForGlyphRange
that does the glyphs and any decorations
like underlines and strike throughs
that might go over the glyphs.
These methods assume that focus is locked on a
flipped view or image or other graphics context.
And these are two possible points for overriding.
There are some other more specific points.
The method showPackedGlyphs:length
is specifically for glyph drawing.
There are specific methods that you could override for
drawing underlines, drawing strike throughs and so forth.
There are some other classes that can be
overridden for specific kinds of drawing.
NSTextAttachmentCell for attachment drawing,
NSTextBlock for table cells.
So how can we customize the text
system at the controller level?
Any of these three classes can be
overridden with a custom subclass.
You could have a custom glyph generator for example.
If you wanted to have full control over the
initial mapping between characters and glyphs.
You could have a custom typesetter
subclass if you want to modify the layout
of the lines and the layout of glyphs in lines.
You could have a custom layout manager subclass
if you want to make some modifications to any
of the drawing that's being done in the text at the
level of individual glyphs and individual lines of text.
So let's have an example of that.
We can go back to the demo machine.
( Period of silence )
So the text system has a lot of different attributes,
but what if it doesn't have the one that I want?
In this case I've decided that bright
colors aren't really enough here.
They don't make my headings and subheadings
stand out the way I want them to.
So I want to do some extra special
fancy drawing behind these headings
and subheadings so it really stand out, whoa, like that.
So now I've done this with a fancy Bezier paths
and gradients to show off some Leopard features.
But also to show that you know you could do any kind
of crazy drawing that you want right there in the text.
And the way I've done this is that I have a custom layout
manager subclass that does my extra special fancy drawing
and I have custom typesetter subclass that
expands the layout around these lines to make room
for my extra special fancy drawing around them.
So let's take a look at that in the code.
( Period of silence )
First of all, my custom typesetter subclass.
Now NSTypesetter has many different override
points so I've chosen one of them here.
I've just overridden one method.
And all I do is if it's enabled, if it's turned on,
then I go back to the text storage and look to see
if the line is a special heading or subheading.
And if it is, then I just increase the space
available by some amount that I know is suitable
to make space for my extra special fancy drawing.
Very simple.
And then my custom layout manager here the method
I've chosen to override is the one I mentioned before
for drawing backgrounds because these, this extra
special fancy drawing is background behind the text.
And again, it's pretty simple.
If it's turned on then we're going to
go through the text that we're drawing.
We're going to go through it line by line.
And see if that is one of our special headings
or subheadings and if it is then we're going
to take the position and size that line and from
it construct a Bezier path and draw that path
and a gradient within it to do
our extra special fancy drawing.
And then of course we call super to do
the normal behavior for everything else.
So this is how if the text system doesn't
support the kind of drawing that you want it to,
you can add just about anything to it that you want.
( Period of silence )
Let's go back to the slides.
So for the rest of the talk, I want to turn the stage
over to my colleague Aki Inoue whose going to talk
about some of the very interesting things
you can do with fonts in Cocoa text system.
>> Thanks Doug.
( Applause )
Hi I'm Aki Inoue from Cocoa group.
Today I'd like to discuss font handling in
Cocoa especially focusing on customization.
Let's get started.
There are four principle font handling
classes in Cocoa, NSFont,
NSFontDescriptor, NSFontManager, and NSFontPanel.
I'm going to be discussing each of these later in detail.
From the beginning, the font architecture was
designed with the Unicode standard in mind.
It works with the character exclusively.
Since we don't have any legacy font
encoding heritage in this environment,
we can offer very clean and consistent font API.
And as with other products of Cocoa framework, FontDescriptor,
FontManager and FontPanel follows
that model view controller design pattern
and it gives us straightforward customizability
and extensibility for the subsystem.
Let's look at, let's talk about NSFont.
NSFont is that graphics primitive in Cocoa.
This is the object you most likely dealing
with when you are handling your style of text.
It is roughly equivalent Java AWT font in Java
environment or the font handlers in Windows GDI.
This is the value for NSFontAttribute name.
This is for the font information in your attributed strings.
NSFont encapsulates multiple font
information into a single, convenient package.
It includes typeface information, size and rendering mode.
The size can be specified with a point size
and/or transformation, transformation metrics.
The font rendering mode consists of
graphics rendering appearance settings
such as anti aliasing or ideal advancement settings.
You can ask NSFont detailed typeface
information for rendering or layout.
Those include names, postscript
names, following name, you name it.
Or you can ask font wide matrix such
as ascender, descender, leading.
Or you can ask information about
each of the glyphs in your font.
Such as bounding in box over (unclear) glyph.
You can directly access NSFont for those information.
However, we are recommending you use the approaches
Doug mentioned earlier in this presentation.
They are NSDrawing, NSStringDrawing API or NSLayoutManager
if you are rendering or measuring text.
Since those possibilities provide higher level abstraction,
you don't have to deal with going detail of Unicode there.
In Leopard we added some enhancements to NSFont.
Prior to Leopard, majority of NSFont
instances were cached by the system
and never delegated during the lifetime of application.
In Leopard, all the font instance follow
the Cocoa memory management combination.
Subject to the allocation of final revision, depending
on your application's memory management conservation.
It gives draw screen more efficient
system font users especially
if your application needs a large number
of typeset usage in your application.
But be careful.
Since now NSFont objects can be deallocated,
it might reveal issues in the application.
For example, if you overrelease font
instances or productive retain in your variable.
It might be deallocated underneath you.
NSFont instances are now toll-free bridged
FUI which CTFont from Core Text framework.
So that we can now have unified NSFont, unified
font representation throughout the system.
With NSFontFeatureSettingsAttribute,
you can have programming,
programmatic access to the advance type review features.
Previously only accessible from the
typography panel user interface.
And we enhanced the system so your applications can now
use other multiple master font or true type variation font.
Finally, we completed the API usage
clean up process, started in Tiger.
NSFont is now fully subclassable.
You don't override any of the public API in NSFont object.
And customize the behavior in the text system.
Now let's talk about other part of Cocoa.
Behind the NSFontPanel view, there
is model view controller relationship.
NSFontDescriptor is the data model object.
And represent each type faces available
to your applications.
And NSFontManager manages those data
object and coordinates with the view objects
such as NSFontPanel or NSFont menus.
And there's no NSFont menus, just font menu.
NSFontManager, it manage all other
font descriptors in your application.
When you want to know all the font names
available to your applications, ask font manager.
When you want to know all the file names that are
available to your application, ask the font manager.
NSFontManager also manages font collections.
You can add, delete, modify font collection.
By the way, a font collection is a back of font descriptors.
And suppose convenient font manager
in facility to your end users.
And NSFontManager can map between type faces.
For example, you can map, you can
query for mod version of a font.
Or you can ask for a different
typeface in a different family.
And NSFontManager can manage a notion
of font select in your application.
By managing the current font selection abstractly, it
can act as a middle man between the your document object
and standard font using interface
in Cocoa framework such as NSPanel.
Now let's look at an NSFontPanel.
NSFontPanel provides the standard font selection
using interface for both Cocoa and Carbon applications.
And it has bit point font collection management facility.
So end user can manage the font
selection right in the panel without going
to any special font management
application such as Font Book.
It is highly customizable for both
end users and programmers.
And it gives you access to a variety
of features such as typography panel,
or text effects such as underline or shadows.
Let's talk about customizing NSFontPanel.
You can customize font panel in two ways.
You can add your own controls to NSFontPanel
via calling setAccessoryView.
Or you can customize or limit the control available
inside of panel depending on your document object using
the validateModesForFontPanel method.
Let's talk about, let's take a look at how
to add accessory view to your font panel.
You can create any view with controls of your
choice in Interface Builder and add that view
to the font panel using setAccessoryView like this.
It's pretty simple.
And NSFontPanel just accommodates
its frame based on your views frame.
This is a normal font panel.
And with accessory view.
When you want to apply your change in accessory view,
just as Doug mentioned in this earlier presentation,
you can send change attributes
message to your first responder.
The document object reply with
convertAttributes multiple time
for each of the runs in the document selection.
( Period of silence )
This is how you do it.
As with normal action of messages, you can send
changeAttributes message to the new target
and NSApplication objects write the message
appropriate for, appropriate in the creation.
It's typical you document object.
In the convert attributes, you can return the
modified version of the paths (unclear) attributes.
Just focusing to the attributes you are interested in.
When you update, you are using interface
according to the user selection.
You can subclass NSFontManager and implement
setSelectedAttributes as multiple message method.
On the document object participating in Cocoa text
system sends that message to the shared font manager.
Inside your algorithm method, you can route
the message to your own font accessory view.
That's pretty simple.
So inside your subclass NSFontManager, you can
implement selected attributes is multiple method.
Don't forget send message to super so that all the
other font are using interface can update its state
and you can reroute the message
to your own FontAccessoryView.
With your setSelect, setSelectedAttributes with
access method with accessory view, it's pretty simple.
You can update your user interface depending on
your, depending on attributes in you are passing.
Of course you can use the Cocoa binding here to
further automate that user interface update.
Finally by implementing validModesForFontPanel
in your document object,
you can limit the control available
for your, for your document.
In this case, I'm already doing
NSFontPanel, FaceModeMask,
and it's going to be NSFontPanel is going to
be displaying just a type face column
in addition to the font family column here.
Let's talk a look in a demo.
( Period of silence )
Demo two please.
>> (Unclear)
>> Oh.
( Period of silence )
Thank you.
This is a slightly modified version of text
edit application you are all familiar with.
And opening a font panel.
As you can see font panel.
( Period of silence )
Can configure itself depending on the user
selected layout and let me add accessory view.
It's pretty simple.
With this accessory view, I can open
a drawer with the document object.
In this drawer there are a couple of switches
you can enable part of the font panels controls.
I can disable size and effects.
Note that each document implements validate
most for font panel and return its own setting.
The font panel updates its user interface
according to the current document selected.
Let's go back to the presentation please.
( Period of silence )
Now finally let me talk about the model object
in the font subsystem, NSFontDescriptor.
NSFontDescriptor can be considered
part of the identity of NSFont instance.
With NSFontDescriptor, you can
describe what the NSFont is.
So by archiving NSFontDescriptor,
you can revive what the NSFont was.
NSFontDescriptor is a very rich font query mechanism.
Based on the accessory key where you pair pattern,
you can query font object inside the application.
For example, in this example, I'm
specifying LucidaGrande as a family name.
And bold as the typeface on the type
the font descriptor on the left.
And the system returns correctly LucidaGrande
Bold typeface with next example,
I'm specifying HelveticaNeue as a family name.
And it returns all the typefaces
belonging to the font family.
Finally, NSFontDescriptor can provide certain aspect
of information that doesn't require the graphic system.
For example, it can return item defined names such as
Postscript names, family names or style characteristics
of the typeface such as font traits or weights.
Also NSFontDescriptor has certain
customizable advanced attributes.
With these attributes, the NSFont can change the behavior.
( Period of silence )
Let's take a look one of the attributes
here, NSFontFixedAdvanceAttribute.
It can specify the advancement used by
all the glyphs in a font instantiated
from NSFontDescriptor that contains this attribute.
This is how you create NSFont instances
that contains advanced attributes.
Let's assume this font variable
contains a valid font reference.
By sending font descriptor, you get back NSFontDescriptor
object that describes this NSFont.
And I'm getting the advancement
for the widest glyph in the font.
Box it into NSNumber.
Now create a new dictionary using this body.
Here I'm creating copy of the original font
descriptor by adding the new advanced attributes.
Envelope, I have NSFont instances
that's through the fixed-pitch.
Let's take a look in a demo.
Okay, I have a document that says
this is a fixed-pitch font,
but obviously this is Times Roman, it's not a fixed-pitch.
By specifying this accessory view switch I'm switching, I'm
adding the NSFontFixedAdvancedAttribute to the font.
And by adjusting the advancement
you have a fixed-pitch Times Roman.
And you can specify for example for Futura or Arial.
And this is the alive.
Let's get back to the presentation please.
( Period of silence )
As you've seen, NSFonts of Cocoa font
subsystem provides enough customizability
and extensibility for most of your application needs.
So please stick to the standard Cocoa
user interface and use NSFont system.
That way you can take advantage of all
enhancement we're going to do in the future.
Let's get back and bring out Doug to wrap this presentation.
( Applause )
>> Let me just summarize.
So the Cocoa text system has a lot of power, a lot of
depth and many different ways that you can customize it
at many different levels for different uses.
In particular, it uses the model
view controller organization
to provide access point at both, at all of these levels.
The model level, the control level and the view level.
For more information, you can look
sample code up on the website.
Our evangelist isn't here right now I don't believe.
But you can contact him at this address.
There are some labs coming up.
There was a Cocoa lab today, but there's going to be
another one tomorrow and we're all going to be there.
And for input methods, there is a lab on Friday
morning and if you're interested in Core Text,
there's another session following this one actually.
There's also a lab Friday afternoon.